I have listed here a ball breaker signaling
device.
Well, that was kind of fun. And I must say, as usual,
these things have a little more implication than
they sound like. That was Art Maxwell and me, I
think. At any rate, at that time there was a lot of
importance of measuring, taking cores on the
ocean bottom and taking temperature out. a
gradient in the ocean bottom, which required very
precise lowering of devices at great depths in the
ocean, temperature probes. And it was important
to know when you were on bottom. And these were
depths of 4,000 fathom or so, you see, 3,000
fathom. Well, you've got a lot of cable out.
There's a fairly light instrument on the bottom of
it. There's really no way to tell when you're on the
bottom of it. So you needed something that told you
when you hit bottom.
Well, there was quite a lot of possibilities of how
you did this. And there have certainly been much
more sophisticated devices since. But this, we
rigged up one real fast. And it was a glass ball with
a hammer and a trip. And when it hit bottom, the
hammer came down and presumably smashed the glass
ball. and the ocean finding itself unsupported,
since there's now a hole in the middle of it at 2,000
or 3,000, fathom rushes in, and the noise it makes
when it meets itself, coming from all sides, is
considerable. There's a lot of power in there. And
you hear this bang on the surface, but you know
you've hit bottom. Well, it turned out to be much
more difficult to break these damn glass balls. I
suspected it. Then you'd have a hammer that just
smashed into pieces on the surface, but under this
pressure, it didn't do anything. It just bounced.
make a point on the hammer big hammer you know
dropping make a point on the hammer the hammer
would sometimes go into the ball and seal other
times it would go in knock a shell off and the ball
would be intact when you came up uh sometimes the
ball would crack all the pieces but not break it
would all be held together by the pressure well we
finally made the proper kind of point that it
always always broke the ball but this of course had
led That paper, incidentally, then, and our
remarks about the difficulty of breaking the ball
have led to the utilization of glass capsules in
underwater vehicles and spherical capsules in
underwater instruments of all sorts because
glass obviously requires quite different
properties under these very high pressures.
Excuse
me. I have high-speed plankton. Sampler in 1958.
Yeah, that was a kind of fun device. When we were
first starting out, 1958? We designed that much
earlier than that. That was when the paper came
out, I guess. It came out years later. That was back
in 1951 or so, or 53 maybe. It was a torpedo-shaped
plankton sampler that could be towed at high speed
at considerable depth. And it had a neat little
recorder in it that told you how deep it was and how
much water was passing through it at each depth. It
worked very well.
It was used for quite a few years. I have, in 1966, an
Isaacs Brown opening-closing trawl. That's just
a modification of the Medwater trawl that allows
you to open and close it at some depth. Now, the last
two things I would like some elaboration on. 1968,
a deep sea observational camera system. Well,
over a series of years we developed these cameras.
They were free fall cameras that you could chuck
over the ship's side. And they went to increasing
sophistication. We designed them in several
different forms. They went to the bottom. They
usually had a bait in the foreground somewhere, a
mass of fish or something, and they sat down there
taking pictures every five minutes or ten
minutes. Sometimes still pictures, sometimes
movies, motion pictures, and sometimes stereo
motion pictures. We had some interesting stereo
motion pictures. And we discovered a great deal
about the deep benthic fauna and how it behaved and
what the distribution of these creatures were,
how they probably searched for the food, and a
whole different food web, you see, of very active
deep creatures, yes.
I think I'll try to revise that program because
it's kind of a natural for a cooperation with small
coastal countries because the cameras can be
operated from unspecialized vehicles. They can
be dropped over the side and sections taken down
across the shelf and find out what really lives in
these deeps. We find, for instance, along this
coast that some of the commercial fish of British
Columbia and southern Alaska and Washington,
probably their main population is down here off
Baja California at great depths. They're
creatures of the cold, dark waters, and they
merely outcrop up in the Arctic regions or near
Arctic regions. And that's where the principal
commercial fishery is based. But the population
itself extends to increasing depths down farther
and farther and closer to the equator. We find a big
population of great arctic sharks off the Baja
California coast, for example. A shark very much
like the
Icelandic or Greenland shark. Huge one. Lots of
shrimp. We'd land deep lobsters. We'd find all
sorts of things. When did you first become
interested in photography?
You mean in underwater photography? In
underwater photography and above water
photography. Well, I became much impressed by the
competency of first-rate cameras to record
things at Bikini, I think. Well, before that. I was
in charge of the photography of the two A-bomb
shots in 1946. And the fact that these big aerial
cameras would allow you to place in space and in
position ships and explosive phenomena and so on
and so forth, I thought was, when they were rigidly
based on land, was a very powerful technique.
I'd used these kinds of cameras in determining the
motion of an amphibious craft in the surf zone. In
that early work at Berkeley, you see, by mounting
cameras on shore and aiming them aerial cameras,
big mapping aerial cameras on shore aimed at
amphibious craft coming through the surf. You
then could position a craft exactly in space
continuously, see just what its motions were. You
could even, on a big craft, you could even measure
the bending of the hull. So I was much impressed by
the competency of first class mapping cameras
used in those kind of modes. And of course, I've
always wanted to see what did the ocean do with a
dead whale on its bottom? What in the devil does it
do with it? It increases the food supply in square
miles for years in a dead whale. It must be adapted
to utilize it. And so it turns out it is.
Ravelle tapped me on that one. Because I'd been
doing this radio-controlled photography. We not
only had two aerial cameras shooting at
amphibious craft in the surf, but a
radio-controlled camera and a planar blimp up
above photographing simultaneously with radio
control. She triggered the shots, automatic
system. And then Revell asked you then to go to
Bikini and mount cameras, which would be in charge
of the photography. In charge of photography,
right. Of the land-based photography. Well, the
radio-controlled photography. And did you use
the same techniques there that you had used?
Essentially, yeah. Did you make any substantial
changes? Oh, well, of course it had to have lots
more backups and things because there was no going
back and repairing the cameras. And so we built the
towers, and we designed the backups. And the
backups were, of course, it was uncertain at that
time what would happen to radio signals at the time
of an atomic explosion. So we had not only a central
radio triggering
synchronizers for the total cameras, airborne
and land, but we had back up individual timers on
each camera. So if it failed to get its pulses, it
asked for another one. And if it got another one and
didn't respond, then it took its own picture
anyway. And as a matter of fact, that saved our neck
just at the instant of the explosion. That's what
Ravel said, exactly what happened. He did? Yeah.
When was that? When I interviewed him. He
suggested that the camera work here was not only
splendid, but it involved innovation which had
not been done before in camera work. Yeah, yeah,
yeah, yeah. That's right. And so exactly what
happened? Why did the cameras fail the first time?
Oh, just because of the tremendous electrostatic
charge that is built up at that instance. You see a
vast amount of static just for that instant shock.
So we got pictures.
The bomb had gone off underwater. The bottom of the
fleet was lit up, and the shockwave had not yet
arrived at the surface. And 30 fathom of water. The
bottom of the fleet is lit, and there's not a pimple
on the surface yet. That's pretty remarkable
photography.
Now, was it contact here on Bikini Atoll? Is this
the contact that brings you to Scripps
Institution? This contact with Revelle here? No,
I don't know. The first time I ever remember
Revelle was an interesting case, as a matter of
fact. I'd built the first of these sea sleds.
Mm-hmm. And we were at Morro Bay, California. And I
had built it, and then I was out on the beach, and we
were going to test it for the first time. We had a
duck, and we had a big spool of rope, just rope,
manila rope. And I had attached this, and I had two
helpers, two duck drivers. I had attached this
roll, and we had it on a standard. And I said, well,
we just started in the surf. First time we ever
started a sea sled. And the commandant of the
little naval base there came down and says,
there's an important young lieutenant at the
train in San Luis Obispo. You're supposed to go
pick up. I'd never heard of Revell before. So I got
in the car and went down. and picked up this young,
slender, tall lieutenant and brought him back.
And we came down on the beach. And here are these two
guys. I told him about this sea sledge taking a line
through the search. Here are these two guys, 6,000
feet of line, standing out in the ocean. The cable
spool has pulled off the standards. They've got an
oar shoved through the cable spool. It's plowing
the sand down towards the beach, you see. So
obviously, they're being pulled into the surf,
both of them. I grabbed the duck then and ran a wire
out from the winch at the stern of it and got hold of
it. They hadn't had time to do this. So it was an
interesting first introduction to Ravel and our
work there. He was immensely impressed by that
damn sea sled, I must say. It's kind of a mysterious
line going out into the ocean, these two guys. And
of course, I'm obviously shocked and excited. So
that was my first introduction to him. We then took
him out in the surf in the duck. He'd never been out
in a DUKW, a wheeled vehicle. Marvelous vehicles.
Marvelous. We never really managed to sink one in
any reasonable sort of surf. I have a picture of one
with a 28-foot breaker coming up on it. I was in. I
survived it, obviously. Well, anyway, so that was
my first introduction to Rivelle. Maybe 1945, I
don't know when it was. He was just organizing what
was going on. Marvelous man. And, well, who
specifically taps you to do the photography at
Bikini? He does, doesn't he? Rivelle, yeah. He
does, all right. And then after photography
there, and... I got interested in radioactivity.
OK. And waves. In fact, that's one of the reasons we
did the photography. It turned out it really was
necessary to place all the ships in the exact
position. But then, of course, the main purpose
was the wave theory, what kind of explosive waves
were produced by these sorts of things. And that's
what we followed then on the bigger shots later,
the waves. What sort of wave did you expect? from
that. Well, just about what came, what were
produced, yeah. Some people argue that the wave
would be untold feet high. Well, those were
interesting days when we first shot off the big
ones out there, because it wasn't a bit clear that
the atoll would necessarily not collapse. And we
had some of the best world famous, Kishtiakowsky,
the famous soil machination You see, a coral atoll
is really kind of a barrel full of mud, a thin shell,
a brittle shell. And it's clear that coral atolls
only exist where there are no earthquakes.
So there was a real question. Was the thing stable
or not? The bomb itself probably couldn't make a
highly destructive wave. But over the atoll, it
might in critical depth and deep water. But as part
of the atoll collapsed, then the amount of energy
they got linked into a wave was gigantic. We surely
didn't know whether that would take place or not.
And there lies a tale of where we almost evacuated
the Pacific Basin by accident. Someday we'll go
into that one. Was that the cloud mist that
appeared? No, no. No, no.
I don't know if this tale has ever quite been told.
This was at Ivy Mike, the first big gauge bomb. And
it was shot off on an island in the north of Bikini,
northwest of Bikini. Totally obliterated the
island. And at that time, we didn't know whether it
would produce a huge wave or not. So we set off on a
seamount about 700 fathom deep. We mounted two
floating wave gauges. And we had the Horizon, one
of our ships, and Walter Monk was there, and Bill
Bascom was there, and a fellow by the name of
Commander Monk Hendricks.
And we had these two, and we were going to stay with
them 12 minutes, which was after the bomb went off.
and see if there was going to be a great change in
water level. And we had a set of signals. And
everything was set up to start the evacuation of
Pacific Coast cities if we had a big one. Well, the
bomb went off. We stayed there the 12 minutes. The
cloud was overhead at this time. We'd practiced
getting these skiffs back ashore, aboard. Not our
moorings, just the skiffs we ran. So we watched
that first H-bomb from skiffs 26 miles away. and
the open water with the horizon was well away.
Well, we had practiced getting those skiffs back
aboard and us aboard, and the earliest we could do
it was something like 15 minutes, but with that
cloud overhead, we got it done in something like
five, you know. Every hand was there pulling.
Well, we then got in the fallout, We took more
fallout than any fixed point on the Earth's
surface has ever gotten, because we were conned
into following a path that eventually turned out
we were following the point of maximum fallout for
something like 17 hours. Anyway, days later, we
got back to the skiffs and picked them up. One
minute after we left that skiff, one of these
moorings showed. a record of a 50-foot wave
something had gone wrong with it what had happened
was the the pressure gauge had not locked into its
position and and had suddenly let loose and slid
down the cable 50 feet but of course we wouldn't
have known that it went up 50 feet and stayed there
But if we'd been there and seen the 50-foot wave, we
would have certainly called for the evacuation of
the Pacific cities of the North Pacific. And the
fiasco would have been absolutely gigantic.
Scripps' name would have been totally mud. When
did you come to Scripps? Well, I oscillated
between Scripps and Berkeley for a year or more in
about 1948 or thereabouts. I first applied to
Scripps in 1936 for a job.
was here. I had been commercial fishing. I had
gotten a lot of questions about my mind about the
oceans. I asked very puzzling things when I was
still puzzling. I had written a letter to Scripps
asking why these things were taking place. I got an
answer which really didn't address the questions
I'd asked. Just like even today, why you get all
kinds of questions from fishermen and one thing or
another. So I thought, boy, those guys need some
help down there. But it seems to me, I can't answer
these kinds of questions, so I applied for a job. It
took me 10 years to get here.
was director then, just freshly director in 1936.
Did it seem to you as if Scripps' institution
functioned better when it was smaller? Well, it
depends what you mean by better. It was a hell of a
lot more fun, I guess. In many ways, there was more
rapport, and there was more of a spirit of
adventure, I think. I was thinking about
interchange of ideas. I'm shocked that a guy comes
to you and says, how about a troll? You're involved
with the monk. And did you seem to have more
exchange with your colleagues? Was it
compartmentalized then? Is it
compartmentalized now? Well,
I think in any oceanographic institution, this
fundamentally has to be interdisciplinary. And I
think it perpetually tends to crystallize into
special forms of each of the disciplines again,
you see. There's a perpetual necessity to be
breaking up. There's a polymerization that goes
on, a crystallization that has to be continuously
combated. People like to talk to people who are in
their same field. There's no question about it.
Yet, really, the penetration and understanding
of the universe in general, and the oceans in
particular, and the planet in particular,
certainly requires communication of all sorts.
And yet, I think the ideal has to be accumulation
around temporary nuclei that then break up and
form new associations, and that's a hard thing to
form. A follow-up on this. Now, when Ravel goes to
Pakistan, don't you go with him? No, I have been
with him. You have been with him to Pakistan. Well,
that's what I meant on his first trip to Pakistan to
study the soils. Weren't you part of that? Sure.
How would you be involved in that? What was your
connection with this solization process? Well,
obviously, the salt eventually had its origins in
the oceans. I mean, as Ravel says, if you want to
understand a planet with oceans, you also have to
understand a planet without them. That's why you
should study Mars.
Kind of control, huh? One planet with, one planet
without. That's not very, from that viewpoint,
it's not much of a stretch to say you ought to also
look at the doabs of West Pakistan, where the
problem is salt. And I had worked some on the salt of
the Colorado River and various other things. I was
interested in halophytic plants. I think they're
really a vast potential halophytic plants of this
world, the ones that are perfectly capable, the
higher plants that are perfectly capable of
living in seawater. Totally unexplored. Almost
totally unexplored. We have no idea what the total
genetics of all the halophytic plants of this
world are. Every time we even look at it, we find new
ones. Halophytic avocado, for instance.
Fortunellas, legumes.
You see. Our crop plants, the crop plants on which
man depends for his entire existence, strangely
were all developed by prehistoric man. We have
never developed a crop plant with any
consequence. In historic times, we've made
improvements, or sort of improvement. But all the
principal tremendous selections of polyploidy
and everything are made by primitive man. The only
thing we've developed in historic times are
grapefruit and pustule sprouts. And, you know,
nobody's going to feed the human race on those. So
the whole curious matter of increasing
salination around the world, the increased need
for utilization of seawater for agriculture, of
aquaculture and so forth. And this vast array of
plants, higher plants, that know perfectly well
how to desalinate seawater all by themselves
using sunlight at high-level energy rather than
the degraded form we can use it in, has really
received no attention. It's something Texas A&M
ought to get into.
Was this what originally attracted you to your
work on the Colorado River, or was it vice versa?
Well, I got interested in the Colorado River for a
very curious reason. I was plotting the total
dissolved solids of the Colorado River one time,
and several other rivers, including the Indus, as
a function of stream flow, annual stream flow. And
it turns out that instead of that line of plot of
total dissolved solids per year and total water
flow per year, extrapolating through the
zero-zero axis, which is, say, zero dissolved
solids transported at zero flow, it goes through
the dissolved solid axis at rather high level.
It's an inclined line, which says, in the case of
the Colorado, that at zero flow, it's
transporting 3,600,000 tons of salt. Well, the
only possible explanation for such a decent
river, like the Mississippi, goes through the
zero-zero axis. But both the Indus and the
Colorado do not. The only possible explanation
for this is that there are brine springs feeding
into the rivers. Brine springs, not salt springs,
but concentrated brines, which are continuously
flowing. So that as the river goes down a year of low
flow, the slant is higher.
We start hunting for those springs, which we
assume must exist. And we found none of them in the
hydrological literature at all. We found them in
the anthropological literature. The Indians
knew about these brine springs flowing into
Colorado. And the first one we looked for was a
great series of volcano-like structures of pure
salt with pure saturated brine flowing down into
Colorado. 600,000 tons a year. And I thought, you
know, the hydrological mythology is the river
supplies you with water that God has determined
the quality of. That is now your problem. Nobody
ever inquires as to how it got that quality. So now
here's just this one spring. 600,000 tons is
enough to put 15,000 acres out of existence every
year by salination. But it's a small flow. Why not
build a little brick retainer and pump the damn
stuff back up on the mesa or inject it into the
ground and keep it out of the Colorado? Can't get
anybody interested in that. Reclamation
Department doesn't do that sort of thing.
Agriculture Department care less. That's not
part of their problem. And so it still flows into
the Colorado as far as I know.
And there are undoubtedly six more like that. And
out of curiosity, you think anthropological
sites can locate these? That's how we locate it.
That's marvelous.
Because the Indians had a real mythology about the
trek, the salt trek, which was kind of a young
manhood trek to go down in this great canyon and
climb down these cliffs and gather the salt and
bring it back. And that's all recorded in 1896.
That's where we found it. We even found the old
ladder that the first man who went down there early
in this century had built to get down one of these
cliffs, all full of salt drift and crystals of
salt. What made you decide to check
anthropological literature? Well, it's obvious
that if you're going to find out what the Indian
names of these damn streams are, they'd surely
know whether they had salt in them or not.
And, of course, the Indus does the same thing. I
mean, it's easy. There's a place called Salt
Mountain or Salt Hill. It's by Sargodha. And it
flows into the Indus. It's salt water.
Anyway, that's only part of it. But it's
interesting, it seems to me. And it's an
interesting commentary on our bureaucracy.